# Interrealm Specification

## Introduction

**Gno is the first multi-user general-purpose programming language.**

Gno is a minimal extension of the Go language for multi-user programming. Gno
allows a massive number of programmers to iteratively and interactively develop
a single shared program such as Gno.land. In other words, Go is a restricted
subset of the Gno language in the single-user context.

All of our programming languages to date are designed for a single programmer
user. All programming languages make the same assumption that there is only one
user -- the programmer, or program executor user. Whether written in C, C++,
Python, Java, Javascript, or Go, it is assumed that all of the dependencies of
the program are trusted. If there is a vulnerability in any of the dependencies
there is a vulnerability in the program; it is the job of the programmer or
program/product manager to ensure that the overall program is free of exploits.

When interacting with programs owned by another user (or process) various
techniques are used such as via IPC APIs often generated by tools like
Protobuf/GRPC; but such tools add extra complexity, additional surface area for
exploits, additional compute complexity, and do not benefit directly from the
language's native rules and type-checker--especially for inter-process passing
of in-memory object references.

### Interrealm Programming Context

Gno.land supports three types of packages:
- **Realms (`/r/`)**: Stateful user applications (smart contracts) that
  maintain persistent state between transactions
- **Pure Packages (`/p/`)**: Stateless libraries that provide reusable 
  functionality
- **Ephemeral Packages (`/e/`)**: Temporary code execution with MsgRun
  which allows a custom main() function to be run instead of a single
  function call as with MsgExec.

For an overview of the different package types in Gno (`/p/`, `/r/`, and 
`/e/`), see [Anatomy of a Gno Package](../builders/anatomy-of-a-gno-package.md).

Interrealm programming refers to the ability of one realm to call functions 
in another realm. This can occur between:
- Regular realms (`/r/`) calling other regular realms via MsgExec and MsgRun.
- Ephemeral realms (`/e/`) calling regular realms via MsgRun (like main.go)

The key concept is that code executing in one realm context can interact with 
and call functions in other realms, enabling complex multi-user interactions 
while maintaining clear boundaries and permissions.

The Gno language is extended to support a `context.Context`-like argument
to denote the current realm-context of a Gno function. This allows a user
realm function to call itself safely as if it were being called by an external user,
and helps avoid a class of security issues that would otherwise exist.

### Realm-Storage Write Access

Every object in Gno is persisted in disk with additional metadata including the
object ID and an optional OwnerID (if persisted with a ref-count of exactly 1).
The object ID is only set at the end of a realm-transaction during
realm-transaction finalization (more on that later). A GnoVM transaction is
composed of one or many scoped (stacked) realm-transactions.

```go
type ObjectInfo struct {
	ID       ObjectID  // set if real.
	Hash     ValueHash `json:",omitempty"` // zero if dirty.
	OwnerID  ObjectID  `json:",omitempty"` // parent in the ownership tree.
	ModTime  uint64    // time last updated.
	RefCount int       // for persistence. deleted/gc'd if 0.

	// Object has multiple references (refcount > 1) and is persisted separately
	IsEscaped bool `json:",omitempty"` // hash in iavl.
    ...
}
```

When an object is persisted during realm-transaction finalization the object
becomes "real" (as in it is really persisted in the virtual machine state) and
is said to "reside" in the realm; and otherwise is considered "unreal". New
objects instantiated during a transaction are always unreal; and during
finalization such objects are either discarded (transaction-level garbage
collected) or become persisted and real.

Unreal (new) objects that become referenced by a real (persisted) object at
runtime will get their OwnerID set to the parent object's storage realm, but
will not yet have its object ID set before realm-transaction finalization.
Subsequent references at runtime of such an unreal object by real objects
residing in other realms do not override the OwnerID intially set, so during
realm-transaction finalization it ends up residing in the first realm it became
associated with (referenced from). Unreal objects that become persisted but was
never directly referenced by any real object during runtime will only get its
OwnerID set to the realm of the first real ancestor.

Real objects with ref-count of 1 have their hash included in the sole parent
object's serialized byte form, thus an object tree of only ref-count 1
descendants are Merkle-hashed completely.

When a real or unreal object ends up with a ref-count of 2 or greater during
realm-transaction finalization its OwnerID is set to zero and the object is
considered to have "escaped". When such a real object is persisted with
ref-count of 2 or greater it is forever considered escaped even if its
ref-count is in later transactions is reduced to 1. Escaped real objects do not
have their hash included in the parent objects' serialized byte form but
instead are Merkle-ized separately in an iavl tree of escaped object hashes
(keyed by the escaped object's ID) for each realm package. (This is implemented
as a stub but not yet implemented for the initial release of Gno.land)

**An object can only be directly mutated if the object resides in the same
realm as the Gno VM's current runtime realm-context, or, if a
non-crossing method of the receiver is called; and in both cases not superceded
by a non-crossing method call into another storage-realm.** 

(Note that the term "realm" refers to both storage (state) of the realm as well
as a virtual user (agent) representing the realm. We may change terminology in
the future to separate these two concepts. For example we may refer to the
current runtime realm-context user as an "realm-agent" to distinguish it from
the "realm-storage" in which objects resides.)

Go's language rules for value access through dot-selectors & index-expressions
are the same within the same realm, but exposed values through dot-selector &
index-expressions are tainted read-only when performed by an external realm.
More on that later.

#### Crossing-Functions and Crossing-Methods

A crossing-function or crossing-method is that which is declared in a realm and
has as its first argument `cur realm`. The first argument *must* be called
`cur` as enforced by the preprocessor type-checker, and to prevent confusing
such an argument `cur realm` can only be declared as the first argument.

Realm-context and realm-storage crossing occurs when a crossing-function or
crossing-method is called with the `cross` keyword in the first argument as in
`fn(cross, ...)`. Such a call is called a "cross-call".

```go
package main
import "gno.land/r/alice/realm1"

func main(cur realm) {
    bread := realm1.MakeBread(cross, "flour", "water")
}
```

(In Linux/Unix operating systems user processes can cross-call into the kernel
by calling special syscall functions, but user processes cannot directly
cross-call into other users' processes. This makes the GnoVM a more complete
multi-user operating system than traditional operating systems.)

When a crossing-function or crossing-method is called with `nil` as the first
argument instead of `cross` it is a non-crossing call; and no realm-context nor
realm-storage crossing takes place. To prevent confusion a non-crossing call of
a crossing-function declared in a realm different than that of the caller's
realm-storage (or a non-crossing call of a crossing-method of a receiver
residing in realm-storage different than that of the caller's realm-storage)
will result in either a type-check error; or a runtime error if the
crossing-function or crossing-method is variable.

Besides explicit realm-crossing via the `fn(cross, ...)` syntax, implicit
storage-crossing occurs when cross-calling a non-crossing method of a receiver
object residing in an external realm-straoge. Storage-crossing into a
receiver's residing realm allows the method to directly modify the receiver
(and any objects directly reachable and residing in the receiver's residing
realm). Unlike explicit realm-crossing, storage-crossing does not shift or
otherwise effect the current/previous realm-context.

In other words, the current realm-context as returned by
`runtime.CurrentRealm()` does not change when a non-crossing method is called
like `receiver.Method(args...)`. If the receiver resides in realm-storage that
differs from the caller's realm-storage (or realm-context with no intermediate
storage-crossing) such a method call cannot directly modify the receiver nor
any reachable object that resides in any realm-storage besides that of the
caller's own realm-storage. 

On the other hand if the method is a crossing-method as in
`receiver.Method(cross, args...)` both realm-crossing and storage-crossing
takes place; the current realm-context and realm-storage changes to the realm
where the method is declared (not necessarily where the receiver resides). Such
a method-call cannot directly modify the real receiver if it happens to reside
in a realm other than where the type and methods are declared; but it can
modify any unreal receiver or unreal reachable objects.

#### Realm-Context and Realm-Storage Boundaries

Each time a crossing-function or crossing-method is cross-called it shifts the
"current" runtime realm-context to the "previous" runtime realm-context such
that `runtime.PreviousRealm()` returns what used to be returned with
`runtime.CurrentRealm()` before the realm-context boundary. The current
realm-storage is always set to that of realm-context after cross-calling.

Every crossing-call of a crossing-function or crossing-method creates a new
realm-context boundary; even when there is no resulting change/shift in
realm-context or realm-storage.

A realm-storage boundary is defined as a change in the call frame stack from
one realm-storage to another. A realm-storage boundary occurs when calling a
storage-crossing (non-crossing) method from one realm-storage to another
realm-storage in which the real receiver resides. No realm-storage boundary
occurs when calling a non-crossing method of an unreal receiver.

Storage-crossing a non-crossing method may create a realm boundary but
`runtime.CurrentRealm()` and `runtime.PreviousRealm()` always remain unchanged;
these only change/shift when cross-calling crossing-functions or
crossing-methods.

The current and previous realm-context have an associated Gno address from
which native coins can be sent from and received to. Such native coins can only
be sent from a banker instantiated with either realm-context.

#### Realm-Transaction Finalization

Realm-transaction finalization occurs when returning from a realm-context
boundary (all cross-calls) or a realm-storage boundary (some non-crossing
method calls). When returning from a cross-call (with `cross`)
realm-transaction finalization will occur even with no change of realm-context
or realm-storage. Realm-transaction finalization does NOT occur when returning
from a non-crossing-call of a method of an unreal receiver or a real receiver
that resides in the same realm-storage as that of the caller.

During realm-transaction finalization all new reachable objects are assigned
object IDs and stored in the current realm-storage; and ref-count-zero objects
deleted (full "disk-persistent cycle GC" will come after launch); and any
modified ref-counts and new Merkle hash root computed. 

## Readonly Taint Specification

Go's language rules for value access through dot-selectors & index-expressions
are the same within the same realm, but exposed values through dot-selector &
index-expressions are tainted read-only when performed by an external realm.

The readonly taint prevents the direct modification of real objects by any
logic, even from logic declared in the same realm as that of the object's
storage-realm.

A realm cannot directly modify another realm's objects without calling a
function that gives permission for the modification to occur.

For example `externalrealm.Foo` is a dot-selector expression on an external
object (package) so the value is tainted with the `N_Readonly` attribute.

The same is true for `externalobject.FieldA` where `externalobject` resides in
an external realm.

The same is true for `externalobject[0]`: direct index expressions also taint
the resulting value with the `N_Readonly` attribute. 

The same is true for `externalobject.FieldA.FieldB[0]`: the readonly taint
persists for any subsequent direct access, so even if FieldA or FieldB resided in
the caller's own realm-context or realm-storage the result is tainted readonly.

A Gno package's global variables even when exposed (e.g. `package realm1; var
MyGlobal int = 1`) are safe from external manipulation (e.g. `import
"xxx/realm1"; realm1.MyGlobal = 2`) by the readonly taint when accessed
directly by dot-selector or index from external realm logic; and also by a
separate `DidUpdate()` guard when accessed by other means such as by return
value of a function.

A function or method's arguments and return values retain and pass through any
readonly taint from caller to callee. Even if realm's function (or method)
returns an untainted real object, a separate guard in `DidUpdate()` prevents it
from being modified at runtime by an external realm.

For a realm (user) to manipulate an untainted object residing in an external
realm a function (or method) can be declared in the external realm which
references and modifies the aforementioned untainted object directly (by a name
declared outside of the scope of said function or method). Or, the function can
take in as argument an untainted real object returned by another function.

Besides protecting against writing by direct access the readonly taint also
helps prevent a class of security issue where a realm may be tricked into
modifying something that it otherwise would not want to modify. Since the
readonly taint prohibits mutations even from logic declared in the same realm,
it protects realms against mutating its own object that it doesn't intend to:
such as when a realm's real object is passed as an argument to a mutator
function where the object happens to match the type of the argument.

Objects returned from functions or methods are not readonly tainted. So if
`func (eo object) GetA() any { return eo.FieldA }` then `externalobject.GetA()`
returns an object that is not tainted assuming eo.FieldA was not otherwise
tainted. While the parent object `eo` is still protected from direct
modification by external realm logic, the returned object from `GetA()` can be
passed as an argument to logic declared in the residing realm of `eo.FieldA`
for direct mutation.

Whether or not an object is readonly tainted it can always be mutated by a
method declared on the receiver.

```go
// /r/alice

var blacklist []string

func GetBlacklist() []string {
    return blacklist
}

func FilterList(cur realm, testlist []string) { // blanks out blacklist items from testlist
    for i, item := range testlist {
        if contains(blacklist, item) {
            testlist[i] = ""
        }
    }
}
```

This is a toy example, but you can see that the intent of `FilterList()` is to
modify an externally provided slice; yet if you call `alice.FilterList(cross,
alice.GetBlacklist())` you can trick alice into modifying its own blacklist--the
result is that alice.BlackList becomes full of blank values.

With the readonly taint `var Blacklist []string` solves the problem for you;
that is, /r/bob cannot successfully call `alice.FilterList(cross,
alice.Blacklist)` because `alice.Blacklist` is readonly tainted for bob.

The problem remains if alice implements `func GetBlacklist() []string { return
Blacklist }` since then /r/bob can call `alice.FilterList(cross,
alice.GetBlacklist())` and the argument is not readonly tainted.

Future versions of Gno may also expose a new modifier keyword `readonly` to
allow for return values of functions to be tainted as readonly. Then with `func
GetBlacklist() readonly []string` the return value would be readonly tainted
for bob and alice.

## `fn(cross, ...)` and `func fn(cur realm, ...){...}` Specification

Gno extends Go's type system with interrealm rules. These rules can be
checked during the static type-checking phase (but at the moment they are
partially dependent on runtime checks).

All functions in Gno execute under a realm context as determined by the call
stack. Objects that reside in a realm can only be modified if the realm context
matches.

A function declared in p packages when called: 

 * inherits the last realm for package declared functions and closures.
 * inherits the last realm when a method is called on unreal receiver.
 * implicitly crosses to the receiver's resident realm when a method of the
   receiver is called. The receiver's realm is also called the "borrow realm".

A function declared in a realm package when called:

 * explicitly crosses to the realm in which the function is declared if the
   function is declared as `func fn(cur realm, ...){...}` (with `cur realm` as the 
   first argument). The new realm is called the "current realm".
 * otherwise follows the same rules as for p packages.

The `cur realm` argument must appear as the first argument of a function's 
parameter list. It is illegal to use anywhere else, and cannot be used in p
packages. Functions that start with the `cur realm` argument as first argument
are called "crossing functions". 

A crossing function declared in a realm different from the last explicitly
crossed realm *must* be called like `fn(cross, ...)`. That is, functions of
calls that result in explicit realm crossings must use `cross` as the first 
argument (`cross` is a keyword reserved specifically for this purpose).

`std.CurrentRealm()` returns the current realm that was last explicitly crossed
to.

`std.PreviousRealm()` returns the realm explicitly crossed to before that.

A crossing function declared in the same realm package as the callee may be
called like `fn(cross, ...)` or `fn(cur, ...)`. When called with `fn(cur, ...)`
there will be no realm crossing, but when called like `fn(cross, ...)` there is
technically a realm crossing and the current realm and previous realm returned
are the same. 

The current realm and previous realm do not depend on any implicit crossing to
the receiver's borrowed/storage realm even if the borrowed realm is the last
realm of the call stack equal to `m.Realm`. In other words `std.CurrentRealm()`
may be different from `m.Realm` (the borrow realm) when a receiver is called on
a foreign object.

Calls of methods on receivers residing in realms different from the current
realm must *not* be called like `fn(cross, ...)` if the method is not a
crossing function itself, and vice versa. Or it could be said that implicit
crossing is not real realm crossing. (When you sign a document with someone
else's pen it is still your signature; signature:pen :: current:borrowed)

A crossing method declared in a realm cannot modify the receiver if the object
resides in a different realm. However not all methods are required to be
crossing methods, and crossing methods may still read the state of the receiver
(and in general anything reachable is readable).

New unreal objects reachable from the borrowed realm (or current realm if there
was no method call that borrowed) become persisted in the borrowed realm (or
current realm) upon finalization of the foreign object's method (or function).
(When you put an unlabeled photo in someone else's scrapbook the photo now
belongs to the other person). In the future we will introduce an `attach()`
function to prevent a new unreal object from being taken.

MsgCall can only call (realm) crossing functions.

MsgRun will run a file's `main()` function in the user's realm and may call 
both crossing functions and non-crossing functions.

A realm package's initialization (including `init()` calls) execute with current
realm of itself, and it `std.PreviousRealm()` will panic unless the call stack
includes a crossing function called like `fn(cross, ...)`.

### `fn(cross, ...)` and `func fn(cur realm, ...){...}` Design Goals

P package code should behave the same even when copied verbatim in a realm
package.

Realm crossing with respect to `std.CurrentRealm()` and `std.PreviousRealm()`
is important enough to be explicit and warrants type-checking.

A crossing function of a realm should be able to call another crossing function
of the same realm without necessarily explicitly crossing realms.

Sometimes the previous realm and current realm must be the same realm, such as
when a realm consumes a service that it offers to external realms and users.

A method should be able to modify the receiver and associated objects of the
same borrowed realm.

A method should be able to create new objects that reside in the same realm by
default in order to maintain storage realm consistency and encapsulation and
reduce fragmentation.

In the future an object may be migrated from one realm to another when it loses
all references in one realm and gains references in another. The behavior of
the object should not change after migration because this type of migration is
implicit and generally not obvious without more language features.

Code declared in p packages (or declared in "immutable" realm packages) can
help different realms enforce contracts trustlessly, even those that involve
the caller's current realm. Otherwise two mutable (upgradeable) realms cannot
export trust unto the chain because functions declared in those two realms can
be upgraded.

Both `fn(cross, ...)` and `func fn(cur realm, ...){...}` may become special syntax in
future Gno versions.


## `panic()` and `revive(fn)`

`panic()` behaves the same within the same realm boundary, but when a panic
crosses a realm boundary (as defined in [Realm
Boundries](#realm-boundaries)) the Machine aborts the program. This is
because in a multi-user environment it isn't safe to let the caller recover from
realm panics that often leave the state in an invalid state.

This would be sufficient, but we also want to write our tests to be able
to detect such aborts and make assertions. For this reason Gno provides
the `revive(fn)` builtin.

```go
abort := revive(func() {
    cross(func(_ realm) {
        panic("cross-realm panic")
    })
})
abort == "cross-realm panic"
```

`revive(fn)` will execute 'fn' and return the exception that crossed
a realm finalization boundary.

This is only enabled in testing mode (for now), behavior is only partially
implemented. In the future `revive(fn)` will be available for non-testing code,
and the behavior will change such that `fn()` is run in transactional
(cache-wrapped) memory context and any mutations discarded if and only if there
was an abort.

TL;DR: `revive(fn)` is Gno's builtin for STM (software transactional memory).

## `attach()`

Coming soon.

## Application

P package code cannot contain crossing functions. P package code also cannot 
import R realm packages. But code can call named crossing functions e.g. 
those passed in as parameters.

You must declare a public realm function to be a crossing function if it is 
intended to be called by end users, because users cannot MsgCall non-crossing
functions (for safety/consistency) or p package functions (there's no point).

Utility functions that are a common sequence of non-crossing logic can be
offered in realm packages as non-crossing functions. These can also import and
use other realm utility non-crossing functions; whereas p packages cannot
import realm packages at all. And convenience/utility functions that are being
staged before publishing as permanent p code should also reside in upgradeable
realms.

Generally you want your methods to be non-crossing. Because they should work
for everyone. They are functions that are pre-bound to an object, and that
object is like a quasi-realm in itself, that could possibly reside and migrate
to other realms. This is consistent with any p code copied over to r realms;
none of those methods would be crossing, and behavior would be the same; stored
in any realm, mostly non-crossing methods that anyone can call. Why is a
quasi-realm self-encapsulated object in need to modify the realm in which it is
declared, by crossing? That's intrusive, but sometimes desired.

You can always cross-call a method from a non-crossing method if you need it.

Implementation for `std.CurrentRealm()` and `std.PreviousRealm()` are defined
in `stdlibs/std/native.gno/go` and related files in the directory, while
overrides for testing are defined in `testing/stdlibs/std/std.gno/go`. All
stdlibs functions are available unless overridden by the latter.

`std.CurrentRealm()` shifts to `std.PreviousRealm()` if and only if a function
is called like `fn(cross, ...)`.

### MsgCall

MsgCall may only call crossing functions. This is to prevent potential
confusion for non-sophisticated users. Non-crossing calls of non-crossing
functions of other realms is still possible with MsgRun.

```go
// PKGPATH: gno.land/r/test/test

func Public(_ realm) {

    // Returns (
    //     addr:<origin_caller>,
    //     pkgpath:""
    // ) == std.NewUserRealm(origin_caller)
    std.PreviousRealm()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:<derived_from "gno.land/r/test/test">,
    //     pkgpath:"gno.land/r/test/test"
    // ) == std.NewCodeRealm("gno.land/r/test/test")
    std.CurrentRealm()

    // Call a crossing function of same realm with crossing
    AnotherPublic(cross)

    // Call a crossing function of same realm without crossing
    AnotherPublic(cur)
}

func AnotherPublic(_ realm) {
    ...
}
```

### MsgRun

```go
// PKGPATH: gno.land/e/g1user/run

import "gno.land/r/realmA"

func main() {
    // There is assumed to be in "frame -1"
    // a crossing from UserRealm(g1user) to
    // CodeRealm(gno.land/e/g1user/run) before
    // main() is called, so crossing() here
    // is redundant.
    // crossing()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:g1user,
    //     pkgpath:""
    // ) == std.NewUserRealm(g1user)
    std.PreviousRealm()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:g1user,
    //     pkgpath:"gno.land/e/g1user/run"
    // ) == std.NewUserRealm(g1user, "gno.land/e/g1user/run")
    std.CurrentRealm()

    realmA.PublicNoncrossing()
    realmA.PublicCrossing(cross)
}
```

Notice in `gnovm/pkg/gnolang/misc.go`, the following:

```go
// For keeping record of package & realm coins.
// If you need the bech32 address it is faster to call DerivePkgBech32Addr().
func DerivePkgCryptoAddr(pkgPath string) crypto.Address {
	b32addr, ok := IsGnoRunPath(pkgPath)
	if ok {
		addr, err := crypto.AddressFromBech32(b32addr)
		if err != nil {
			panic("invalid bech32 address in run path: " + pkgPath)
		}
		return addr
	}
	// NOTE: must not collide with pubkey addrs.
	return crypto.AddressFromPreimage([]byte("pkgPath:" + pkgPath))
}

func DerivePkgBech32Addr(pkgPath string) crypto.Bech32Address {
	b32addr, ok := IsGnoRunPath(pkgPath)
	if ok {
		return crypto.Bech32Address(b32addr)
	}
	// NOTE: must not collide with pubkey addrs.
	return crypto.AddressFromPreimage([]byte("pkgPath:" + pkgPath)).Bech32()
}
```

These function names are distinct from what is available in Gno
from `stdlibs/std/crypto.gno`:

```go
// Returns a crypto hash derived pkgPath, unless pkgPath is a MsgRun run path,
// in which case the address is extracted from the path.
func DerivePkgAddr(pkgPath string) Address {
	addr := derivePkgAddr(pkgPath) <-- calls gno.DerivePkgBech32Addr()
	return Address(addr)
}
```

1. `std.DerivePkgAddr("gno.land/r/name123/realm")` - bech32 from hash(path)
2. `std.DerivePkgAddr("gno.land/e/g1user/run")` - bech32 substring "g1user"

Therefore in the MsgRun file's `init()` function the previous realm and current
realm have different pkgpaths (the origin caller always has empty pkgpath) but
the address is the same.

### MsgAddPackage

During MsgAddPackage `std.PreviousRealm()` refers to the package deployer both
in global var decls and inside `init()` functions. After that the package
deployer is no longer provided, so packages need to remember the deployer in
the initialization phase if needed.

```go
// PKGPATH: gno.land/r/test/test

func init() {
    // Returns (
    //     addr:<origin_deployer>,
    //     pkgpath:""
    // ) == std.NewUserRealm(origin_deployer)
    // Inside init() and global var decls
    // are the only time std.PreviousRealm()
    // returns the deployer of the package.
    // Save it here or lose it forever.
    std.PreviousRealm()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:<origin_deployer>,
    //     pkgpath:"gno.land/r/test/test"
    // ) == std.NewCodeRealm("gno.land/r/test/test")
    std.CurrentRealm()
}

// Same as in init().
var _ = std.PreviousRealm()
```

```go
// PKGPATH: gno.land/e/g1user/run

func init() {
    // Returns (
    //     addr:g1user,
    //     pkgpath:""
    // ) == std.NewUserRealm(g1user)
    std.PreviousRealm()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:g1user,
    //     pkgpath:"gno.land/e/g1user/run"
    // ) == std.NewCodeRealm("gno.land/e/g1user/run")
    std.CurrentRealm()
}
```

The same applies for pure package (`/p/`) initialization. During initialization 
and tests, `std.CurrentRealm()` can return a package path that starts with 
"/p/". This is because the package is technically still mutable during its 
initialization phase. After initialization, pure packages become immutable and 
cannot maintain state.

## Future Work

`std.SetOriginCaller()` should maybe be deprecated in favor of
`std.SetRealm(std.NewUserRealm(user))` renamed to
`std.SetRealm(std.NewOriginRealm(user))`.

`std.SetRealm(std.NewCodeRealm(path))` renamed to
`std.SetRealm(std.NewPackageRealm(path))`.

-------

## Appendix

### Testing overrides with stdlibs/testing

The `gnovm/tests/stdlibs/testing/context_testing.gno` file provides functions
for overriding frame details from Gno test code.

`testing.SetRealm(std.NewUserRealm("g1user"))` is identical to
`testing.SetOriginCaller("g1user")`. Both will override the Gno frame to make it
appear as if the current frame is the end user signing with a hardware signer.
Both will also set `ExecContext.OriginCaller` to that user. One of these will
become deprecated.

#### Gno test cases with `_test.gno` like `TestFoo(t *testing.T)`

```go
// PKGPATH: gno.land/r/user/myrealm
package myrealm

import (
    "std"
    "testing"
)

func TestFoo(t *testing.T) {
    // At first OriginCaller is not set.

    // Override the OriginCaller.
    testing.SetRealm(std.NewUserRealm("g1user"))

    // Identical behavior:
    testing.SetOriginCaller("g1user")

    // This panics now: seeking beyond the overridden origin frame:
    // std.PreviousRealm()

    // Simulate g1user cross-calling Public().
    // Produce a new frame to override
    func() {
        testing.SetRealm(std.SetCodeRealm("gno.land/r/user/myrealm"))

        std.PreviousRealm() // "g1user", ""
        std.CurrentRealm()  // bech32(hash("gno.land/r/user/myrealm")), "gno.land/r/user/myrealm"

        Public(...) // already in "gno.land/r/user/myrealm"
    }()

    // The following is identical to the above,
    // but not possible in p packages which
    // cannot import realms.
    cross(Public)(...)
}
```

#### Gno filetest cases with `_filetest.gno`

```go
// PKGPATH: gno.land/r/test/test
package test

import (
    "std"
    "stdlibs/testing"

    "gno.land/r/user/myrealm"
)

func init() {
    // XXX Frame not found, there is no deployer for filetests.
    std.PreviousRealm()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:std.DerivePkgAddr("gno.land/r/test/test")
    //     pkgpath:"gno.land/r/test/test"
    // ) == std.NewCodeRealm("gno.land/r/test/test")
    std.CurrentRealm()
}

func main() {
    // There is assumed to be in "frame -1"
    // a crossing from UserRealm(g1user) to
    // CodeRealm("gno.land/r/test/test") before
    // main() is called, so crossing() here
    // is redundant.

    // Returns (
    //     addr:g1user,
    //     pkgpath:""
    // ) == std.NewUserRealm(g1user)
    std.PreviousRealm()

    // Returns (
    //     addr:g1user,
    //     pkgpath:"gno.land/r/test/test"
    // ) == std.NewCodeRealm("gno.land/r/test/test")
    std.CurrentRealm()

    // gno.land/r/test/test cross-calling
    // gno.land/r/user/myrealm:
    cross(myrealm.Public)(...)
}

// Output:
// XXX
```
